(Singing) Started out, last night
Hello!
I’d like to introduce the ideas and background
to the final project for the award of
Masters of Professional Writing.
In this presentation,
I want to address the following questions:
why this story.
Why now.
What’s the market for it.
And why should anyone believe anything a cockatoo has to say?
My project is entitled Sandbanker,
it is a coming of age novel set in
Australia in 1988 - the bicentennial year.
The year of tall ships
the first polymer note.
Some foreign sheila cut a ribbon
at our new parliament house.
There was world expo.
It was also the year that gave the rest
of the planet that beach-side white-bread drama,
Home and Away.
The protagonist and narrator of Sandbanker
is thirteen-year-old, Alex Miller.
Alex lives in Shelly Beach:
a fictitious, isolated town on Australia’s Pacific coast.
With no father and an unstable home life,
Alex finds himself alone.
He dreams of running away from
his erratic mother Dagmar
and her belligerent boyfriend, Terry,
and concocts a plan to head north.
If only he had money.
But his fortunes change when
he encounters ex-bikie Jono,
whom he finds roughing it in a nearby sea-cave.
Alex agrees to help the wounded Jono
and keep his whereabouts secret
from the police in return for money.
The pair soon bond, and Alex learns from his new friend
lessons about life,
the natural environment and human relationships.
Alex soon realises however
that the closer he and Jono become,
the more he puts his own plans and safety at risk.
And when it turns out that Jono is wanted for murder,
and is on the run not only from the police,
but from a treacherous gang leader,
he must decide whether to trust and help Jono
or abandon him and pursue his own agenda.
Before the end, Alex will help clear Jono’s name,
stand up to Terry, and realise what it is to be an adult.
In writing I want to explore themes of friendship, loyalty
and sense of place and belonging that comes from the land.
I developed the story idea and basic narrative structure
during the Scriptwriting module.
I’d always wanted to set a story in the environment in which I grew up,
not only because I have an intimate knowledge of the land and culture,
or at least remnants of memory,
but I wanted to re-examine the epoque
and dispel the golden-syrupy fantasies I developed while growing up.
For example: Did I really like Guns N Roses?
In the late 1980s,
Australia had just crawled its way out of recession
and was moaning its way into another.
In 1988 we were told to celebrate the 200th anniversary of European settlement,
without really being told why;
and those who inquired were often dismantled
by gratuitous flag-waving and the smoke of a million summer barbeques.
Politics and the historical events of 1988
will only simmer in the subtext of my story
and while I’m researching news and factual evidence,
my protagonist will observe such things with relative passiveness,
preferring to focus on his immediate situation.
Already I’ve researched general historical facts
such as the prices of common goods,
coastal weather patterns, marine biology,
and the era’s interesting fashion tastes.
As for the setting,
I want to depict a world of sand,
ocean foam, sun and weed, rocks and  limber eucalypts.
The ocean features in a wealth of Australian literature
from teeny novels such as Puberty Blues
to the modern works of Tim Winton
and provides a fitting backdrop to a coming of age novel.
My research has so far consisted of scouring the internet,
reading popular Australian novels, and newspapers,
and quizzing friends and relatives about the glory days.
The bildungsroman genre has a strong history in Australian publishing
and the voices of fiction writing
contributing to the cultural narrative are more diverse than ever before.
Yet the opportunities to take the traditional publishing route
are becoming rarer every year.
What I learned from the industry analysis,
and speaking with first-time authors is that
writing, as difficult as it is,
is only the first half of the pavlova.
After you’ve put the pen down,
you still have to get on with building an author brand,
promoting your work and building online networks.
There are many opportunities for writers
literary prizes and grants and so on
but the marketplace has changed.
People continue to consume books,
yet sales are down and book advances are diminishing.
Compared with the UK and the USA, the Australian market is minuscule.
I have no delusions of success in the Australian fiction market
I only want to finish my book.